## Results

### Unbiased Identification of Enhancers during Pancreatic Differentiation

Enhancer identification methods using enrichment of histone modifications (e.g. H3K4me1 and H3K27ac) [@doi:10.1038/ng1966; @doi:10.1038/nature07829; @doi:10.1534/g3.114.013565] or by enhancer transcription [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2011.03.042] are quite well established.
For these analyses, we mined previously published ChIP-seq for 3 different histone modifications, in addition to GRO-seq and RNA-seq datasets at five defined stages of differentiation: hESCs, definitive endoderm (DE), primitive gut tube (GT), posterior foregut (FG), and pancreatic endoderm (PE) (Figure {@fig:enhancer_predictions}A, Table {@tbl:data-sets}).
We identified the enhancer universe for the cell lineages in pancreatic differentiation time course model by two methods:(1) enrichment of epigenomic marks (H3K4me1 or H3K27ac) (Figure {@fig:enhancer_pipeline}B), (2) enhancer RNA (eRNA) signatures from GRO-seq (Figure {@fig:enhancer_pipeline}A).
In order to avoid the complications associated with enhancer transcription overlapping promoter transcription, we considered only the potential enhancers $>$ 3 kb away from known transcription start sites (TSSs) of active protein-coding genes as identified by H3K4me3 [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2007.05.042] (Gencode version 19 annotations [@doi:10.1101/gr.135350.111]) (Figure {@fig:density_plot}A).

For the enhancers identified using the histone marks, by method 1, we further filtered the enhancer universe based on the  enrichment of H3K4me1 and H3K27ac, (RPKM cutoff of $\geq$ 1 (Figure {@fig:density_plot}B and C) for both marks in at least one cell line) and identified a set of 182,335 candidate enhancers across all stages of pancreatic differentiation (Figure {@fig:enhancer_predictions}B).
The stringent filter is necessary to reduce false positive enhancers that could easily annotated as alternative chromatin states using ChromHMM [@doi:10.1038/nprot.2017.124], if more histone marks were available.
We then identified a set of 4,974 candidate enhancers (Figure {@fig:enhancer_predictions}B) by method 2, using GRO-seq as described previously [@doi:10.1101/gr.152306.112], using RPKM $\geq$ 0.5 or $\geq$ 1 (Figure {@fig:density_plot}D and E) in at least one cell lineage.
We categorized these candidate enhancers for each cell line and found that $\le$ 20% of the enhancers (histone modifications) and 25-75% (GRO-seq) were shared in each cell lineage.
Additionally, the majority of histone called enhancers are marked by only H3K4me1 (Figure {@fig:enhancer_predictions}B).
These results confirm the enhancer landscape across pancreatic differentiation reported by Wang *et al*.

Next we compared the enhancer universe called by histone prediction methods and enhancer transcription based approach.
We compared the overlap from histone enhancer prediction methods (H3K4me1 or H3K27ac) to output from an enhancer transcription based approach (GRO-seq) and found that 12% of enhancers calls based on enhancer transcription using GRO-seq data are identified by all the of the other methods (enrichment of H3K4me1 and H3K27ac) (Figure {@fig:enhancer_predictions}C, {@fig:genome_browser}A).
Interestingly, greater than 75% of the enhancers were solely identified by enhancer transcription based approach were not called in the histone enhancer prediction method (H3K4me1 or H3K27ac)  (Figure {@fig:enhancer_predictions}C and D, {@fig:genome_browser}B).
Although H3K27ac and H3K4me1 might be two histone modifications commonly associated with enhancers, these are not the only chromatin mark involved and other modifications may be present that were not assayed for [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkt826].
In contrast, less than 1% of enhancers called based on enrichment of H3K4me1 or H3K27ac overlapped with the enhancers identified by the other methods (Figure {@fig:enhancer_predictions}C).
This may in part, due to the fact that enhancer calling based on H3K4me1 or H3K27ac enrichment, yields much larger numbers of putative enhancers (Figure {@fig:enhancer_predictions}D), many of which may be false positives or inactive as the true regulatory elements (Figure {@fig:genome_browser}C and D). Based on these findings, we decided to use the enhancers identified using GROseq (method2) which had the greater percent of enhancers that were called by all the three methods as an input to TFSEE model for the subsequent analysis.

### The TFSEE model

The TFSEE model integrates multiple genomics assays such as, GRO-seq, RNA-seq, and ChIP-seq, data with TF motif information to predict TFs driving the formation of active enhancers and the locations of their cognate enhancers.
The TFSEE model consists of five key data processing steps (Figure {@fig:tfsee_processing}) followed by a data integration stage (Figure {@fig:overview_tfsee}).
In step 1, a universe of active enhancers across the different constituent cell types are identified based on enhancer transcription (as in methods, n=4,974) GRO-seq or total RNA-seq (Figure {@fig:enhancer_pipeline}A).
One could also substitute this with the enhancers identified using the enrichment of epigenomic marks (as in methods, n=218,731) H3K4me1 and H3K27ac (Figure {@fig:enhancer_pipeline}B).
For these universe of enhancers per cell type, the genome-wide enhancer mark and activity levels were assessed by calculating histone mmark enrichment (H3K4me1 and H3K27ac) and eRNA transcription (GRO-seq or total RNA-seq) profiles, in step 2 of TFSEE.
Next we generate an enhancer activity matrix A<sub>CxE</sub> for all cell types C for the universe active of E enhancers.
We assume that the enhancer activity of each cell type is linearly correlated to the amount enhancer transcription (GRO-seq or total RNA-seq, G), and to the epigenomic marks (H3K4me1, M and H3K27ac, H).
To reduce bias each individual enhancer enrichment is scaled between 0 and 1.
Enhancer activity can be expressed as the following formula:

 <center>$A = G + M + H$</center>

As TFSEE was mainly designed to detect enhancer activity changes and TF-enhancer links for each cell type,
in steps 3-4 of TFSEE, the TF to enhancer links are determined by a de novo motif search and a matrix of probability of the TF is created annotating every enhancer to TF for each cell type. If a motif is represented multiple times for a given enhancer location, TFSEE combines the probability of that motif into a single p-value using Stouffer method.
In step 5, the expression profile of all TF's from step 4 was calculated from GRO-seq or RNA-seq data across all the cell types.

The final stage integrates all the data in steps 1-5 (Figure {@fig:overview_tfsee}) to determine TFSEE score matrix and heatmap.
First, the enhancer activity matrix A<sub>CxE</sub>, is combined with motif prediction matrix T<sub>ExF</sub>, represent scaled motif prediction p-values, T, for each enhancer E, to form an intermediate matrix product. This matrix product is entrywise combined with TF expression matrix R, from step 5, the expression of each TF F for each cell type C, into a resulting matrix Z composed of C cell types and F TFs.
TFSEE can be expressed as the following formula:

<center>$Z =( A \times T) \circ  R$</center>


### TFSEE identifies lineage-specific enhancers and their cognate TFs during pancreatic differentiation

Having globally predicting the TFSEE scores across the lineages of pancreatic differentiation, we performed unsupervised hierarchical clustering on the enhancers predicted by GRO-seq method, which grouped the cell types into two major clades: (1) FG, and PE (2) hESC, DE, and GT (Figure {@fig:tfsee_groseq}A, {@fig:tfsee_histone}A).
To better understand the TF-enhancer dynamics across all differentiation stages we clustered the TFSEE score across all differentiation stages, revealing four major categories using enhancer transcription (Figure {@fig:tfsee_groseq}B).
We examined the enrichment of putative enhancers and their associated TFs across stages by quantifying their normalized TFSEE score. This analysis revealed four major clusters: 1. driving early (hESC, DE) and late pancreatic differentiation (FG and PE), 2. enriched in GT, 3. driving pre-pancreatic linage (hESC, DE and GT), and 4. driving late-pancreatic differentiation (FG and PE) (Figure {@fig:tfsee_groseq}C).
We also performed the unsupervised hierarchical clustering on the enhancers predicted by histone enrichment alone and retrieved only three clusters in contrast to the four clusters from enhancers predicted by GRO-seq method (Figure {@fig:tfsee_histone}B). These results highlight TF-enhancers driving pre-pancreatic lineage (hESC, DE and GT), and late-pancreatic differentiation (FG and PE), but fails to highlight any other stage specific drivers (Figure {@fig:tfsee_histone}C).

To investigate the the distinct roles of lineage specific enhancers and their cognate TFs that provide a clear demarcation of enrichment between pre- and late- pancreatic differentiation, we first examined the mRNA levels of the corresponding predicted TFs of each cluster in each of the stages.
Our analysis revealed that TFs identified in pre-pancreatic lineage show equal expression across stages, while late-pancreatic TFs are highly expressed in FG and PE (Figure {@fig:late_pre_diff}A, {@fig:late_pre_histone}A) coinciding with pancreatic induction at the FG stage (Figure {@fig:enhancer_predictions}A).
Conversely, we didn't see an enrichment of TFs in a stage specific manner for either TFs enriched early (hESC, DE) and late pancreatic differentiation (FG and PE) or those maintaining GT pluripotency (Figure {@fig:primitive_gut}A).

Next, we determined if enhancer transcription corresponding to the enriched TFs in each cluster, using TFSEE score, correlates with the regulation of their nearby genes.
To do so, we identified the enhancers corresponding to the predicted TFs using enriched binding motif prediction, and then determined the level of transcription for each enhancer, using GRO-seq or H3K27ac ChIP-seq, (Figure {@fig:late_pre_diff}B, {@fig:late_pre_histone}B, {@fig:primitive_gut}B) and the nearest neighboring gene (upstream or downstream), using RNA-seq (Figure {@fig:late_pre_diff}C, {@fig:late_pre_histone}C, {@fig:primitive_gut}C).
Interestingly, transcribed enhancers exhibited stage specific enrichment, which doesn't correspond to the patterns found from TFSEE enrichment (Figure {@fig:late_pre_diff}B, {@fig:late_pre_histone}B, {@fig:primitive_gut}B).
This result reflects that 1364 of the enhancers, 55% (n=2465, cluster 3) and  99% (n=1371, cluster 4), are shared between clusters and the variation between
clusters is due to differences in TF expression and affinity to motifs.
Likewise, the nearest neighboring gene for each transcribed enhancer doesn't exhibit stage specific enrichment (Figure {@fig:late_pre_diff}C, {@fig:late_pre_histone}C, {@fig:primitive_gut}C) due to the vast abundance of enhancers and thus neighboring genes shared between the clusters.
However, without further high-throughput data to study promoter-enhancer linking (as measured by 4C, ChIA-PET, or Hi-C) [@doi:10.1038/ng1896, @doi:10.1016/j.ymeth.2012.08.009, @doi:10.1038/ng.3286]
it is difficult to understand the stage specific regulatory network.

To further understand the potential regulators of each cluster we determined a rank order frequency distribution for all TFs within each cluster (Figure {@fig:late_pre_diff}D and E).
This analysis revealed  enrichment of HINFP, RARG, ZIC3, and SP1-like family TFs (SP1 and SP8) which are important regulators of embryonic development [@doi:10.1073/pnas.0905651106, @doi:10.3858/emm.2009.41.8.091, @doi:10.1091/mbc.E06-07-0624, @doi:10.1111/j.1440-169X.2005.00797.x] (Figure {@fig:late_pre_diff}D).
Additionally, the Onecut family (ONECUT2 and ONECUT3), EGR1, MITF and FOXP1 TFs are enriched in cluster 4 and have been shown to function in pancreatic and islet cell development [@doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.02.027, @doi:10.1210/en.2012-1064, @doi:10.2337/db12-1464, @doi:10.1007/s00125-015-3635-3] (Figure {@fig:late_pre_diff}E).
Similar results were obtained for comparison of TFSEE scores from different clusters using GRO-seq and Histone called enhancers (Figure {@fig:primitive_gut}D and E, {@fig:late_pre_histone}D and E).

To compare TFs enriched between GRO-seq and Histone driven TFSEE scores we compared the TFs enriched in pre- and late-pancreatic differentiation.
We found 9 and 12 TFs enriched in common for pre- and late-pancreatic respectively.
The differences in TFs that are enriched may be due, in part, to enhancer calling using H3K4me1 and H3K27ac enrichment, yields much larger numbers of putative enhancers, many of which may be false positives or inactive as true regulatory elements
producing more varied enriched TF motifs.
Altogether, our results show that TFSEE can be used to identify cell type-specific transcription factors that control lineage-specific enhancers
