## Discussion

The intricate mechanisms involved in driving the lineage specific transcriptional responses during development remain poorly understood. In this study, we integrated a variety of publicly available high throughput sequencing data from pancreatic lineage development to identify the potential regulators driving the early or late pancreatic lineage development. Our analysis showed the enrichment of the Onecut family (ONECUT2 and ONECUT3), EGR1, MITF and FOXP1 TFs in the late pancreatic differentiation phase (FG, PE) and have been shown to function in pancreatic and islet cell development [@doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.02.027, @doi:10.1210/en.2012-1064, @doi:10.2337/db12-1464, @doi:10.1007/s00125-015-3635-3].
In this process, we also provide a detailed operational description of TFSEE, a previously published computational method [@doi:10.1101/gr.226019.117] for identification of active enhancers and associated cognate TFs during the time course differentiation of human embryonic stem cells (hESC) towards pancreatic cell type.
TFSEE employs multi-view clustering of multiple genomic assays that directly models changes in the transcriptional and epigenetic states across cell-types.
This approach allowed us to directly integrate disparate data while encoding assumptions and dependencies between data types in an interpretable and extendable model.
TFSEE model gains power by both explicitly modeling the enhancer landscape for each cell type and detecting the enhancer activity changes and TF:enhancer links across all cell types.
So far, we applied TFSEE on transcriptional and epigenomic data from time course differentiation of human embryonic stem cells [@doi:10.1016/j.stem.2012.11.023; @doi:10.1016/j.stem.2015.02.013] and a variety of breast cancer cell lines [@doi:10.1101/gr.226019.117].
Our results show that this method can identify cell type-specific TFs and their linked enhancers that are biologically relevant which needs further biological validation.
In particular, this method identifies TFs bound at active enhancers which regulate gene expression patterns, supporting the biological relevance of TFSEE predictions.
In this study, we showed enrichment of HINFP, RARG, ZIC3, and SP1-like family TFs (SP1 and SP8) using TFSEE which are known important regulators of embryonic development [@doi:10.1073/pnas.0905651106; @doi:10.3858/emm.2009.41.8.091; @doi:10.1091/mbc.e06-07-0624; @doi:10.1111/j.1440-169x.2005.00797.x].
Additionally, the model enables novel analysis of driver TFs with limited amount of data.
The model was able to identify lineage specific TFs with as little five cell types and with only three data types (Figure {@fig:tfsee_groseq}B, {@fig:tfsee_histone}B).
A limitation of the TFSEE method is that while the model can be used with reduced data types for enhancer identification it fails to highlight additional subtype specific drivers (Figure {@fig:tfsee_groseq}C, {@fig:tfsee_histone}C) and of the overlapping clusters identified only a subset of TFs are jointly enriched  (Figure {@fig:late_pre_histone}F and G.
However, additional ATAC-seq [@doi:FOXA2], ChIP-seq or DNase-seq data could easily be added to TFSEE and extend the model providing greater granularity on subtype specific TF clusters, however these extended analyses were not included in this study. 


## Conclusions

The increasing availability of different genomic data sets provides an opportunity to perform data integration to uncover novel cell type-specific transcription factor (TF) drivers.
To facilitate identification of these drivers we developed TFSEE, which systemically identify active enhancers and associated cognate TFs.
We showed that TFSEE can identify stage specific TFs during differentiation of endodermal stem cells into pancreatic lineages.
Collectively, our results show how TFSEE can be used to predict molecular drivers maintaining cell type-specific function and biology.
